---
layout: post
title: "Why I Have a Cocktail at 3:30 Every Day"
summary: "Every day at 3:30, I stop what I'm doing and have a cocktail. It's become an incredibly important part of my daily routine."
comments: true
---

Every afternoon, around 3:30 or so (give or take 10 minutes), I stop what I'm doing, make a gin and tonic, and sit on the couch with my wife for 30 minutes. 

What started as a flippant excuse to drink during the workday has become an important part of our relationship. Sure, there's some alcohol involved, but that's not the point - the point is connecting intentionally. 

## From Casual Drinks to Important Routine

My wife and I are busy. I work all the time, and she's a stay-at-home mom to our two kids (2.5 yrs and 1 yr). Needless to say, for most of the day, we're passing by each other with little more than a casual glance at one another.

A few months ago, my wife said to me "Hey, you wanna have a gin and tonic? You have time?" It was around 3:00 in the afternoon, and the kids were napping. It was a rare, slow afternoon, so I said "Yeah! Let's do it!".

The next day, the same thing - "Hey, wanna do a gin and tonic during their naps again?"

"Yup"

Several months later, this has become a sort of a tradition, or at the least, a part of my daily routine. 

## Slowing Down and Connecting

Now, I'm sure some people out there are thinking "Jesus, what a lush. Dude can't get through a workday without a drink". Regardless of if that's true or not (lol, it's not, I kid), what this afternoon cocktail has become about is connection between my wife and I. 30 minutes to sit and chat with no distractions. Our life is so crazy, that this intentional time that's set aside is time we can count on to come together and connect again.

Granted, each day isn't mind-blowing conversation. Sometimes we're chatting about dinner plans, sometimes talking about the kids. Regardless, it's time for the two of us to come together and focus on each other again for 30 minutes, with no distractions. 

## Give It a Try

If you have the benefit of working from home, and you've got someone in the house you want to connect with, give it a shot. Find 30 minutes in the day that's just for the two of you to sit down and chat. You'll find that it's a refreshing oasis in the crazy day-to-day that we all get caught up in. 

Drinks optional (but recommended).
